Are we seriously facing the return of extinct diseases?

Yes we are. One of humanity's greatest enemies, beyond itself, the tiny microrganisms which led to the decimation of populations accross continents are rapidly making a return, thanks in part, to the growing scepticism to vaccinations. 

In an unfortunate twist for all of us, it seems there is clearly a return of diseases we long thought extinct. Mumps, polio, whooping cough, are all diseases that were once defeated, but modern societal phenomena are allowing them to infect people once more. 

The growing trend of anti vaccinations is one such case. It is not a new phenomomenon by any means, its existence as old as vaccines themselves. However this new ethos is now picking up pace, at a moment when globalization allows the rapid transportation of people accross the world -and viruses along with them.

More than 350,000 cases of measles were reported from around the world in 2011, with outbreaks in the Pacific, Asia, Africa, and Europe. In that same year, 90% of measles cases in the U.S. were associated with cases imported from another country.

In a time like this, Americans are chosing more and more to accept the discourse of the anti vaccination movement, believing that their children are avoiding autism by avoiding immunization. The inescapable fact though is that the rate of vaccine preventable disease outbreaks in the US is on the rise according to Council of Foreign Relations study.


*map 

The rate of vaccinations in schools is clearly dropping in numerous states. What does this mean? Vaccines act as a sort of wall, preventing diseases and germs to spread from one individual to another, eliminating thus the risk of larger contagion in a population. Schools for instance, can act as incubators for diseases, due to the high concentration of children in a small area, allowing thus germs to spread easily. 

According to a study conducted by the Journal of the Royal Society Interface outbreaks have been documented in populations with high vaccination coverage (more than 90%), higher than schools in many states.  

More recent analyses of outbreaks and long-term time series in the highly vaccinated populations of the Netherlands and the UK, suggest that the fraction of the population that should be immune to prevent major outbreaks is approximately 96% (Wallinga et al. 2003, 2005)

Unfortunately many states have vaccination levels far lower than that, particularily Colorado which in 2014 almost reached an immunization rate of 80% immunization, creating thus all the preconditions for a possible outbreak.

Measles is not a simple disease. In 1990 Minnesota faced a severe outbreak, with more than 460 cases in Minneapolis and St. Paul, resulting in the death of three children. More recently a large community of Somali immigrants in Minesota, subject to years of anti vaccination rthetorics, is now facing a growing measles outbreak that is spreading rapidly, and fear is taking hold.

Only 41 percent of Somali children in Minnesota in the 24-to-35-month age range have received an MMR vaccine.


map best

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention claims that although disease rates are low in the United States today, but non vaccination makes us vulnurable, and a case that could touch off an outbreak of some disease that is currently under control is just a plane ride away.

In 1974, about 80% of Japanese children were getting pertussis (whooping cough) vaccine. That year there were only 393 cases of whooping cough in the entire country, and not a single pertussis-related death. Then immunization rates began to drop, until only about 10% of children were being vaccinated. In 1979, more than 13,000 people got whooping cough and 41 died. When routine vaccination was resumed, the disease numbers dropped again.

map worst

The reduction of vaccinations in many states is indeed alarming. Even if in a state like Arizona, which has the largest rate of infectious disease outbreaks the rate of MMR2 vaccinations is not among the lowest, the propensity for a larger scale outbreak in vulnurable areas such as schools is there, should the school vaccinations drop significantly. 

(map total)



In the end, humankind is on the brink of a decisive victory against a millenia old foe, which once travelled from China to Europe and the Middle East, ravaging entire empires, and decimated the populations of Latin America when they came to contact with the diseases carried by Spanish explorers. 

Refusal to continue the process of eliminating diseases such as those, is detrimental not only to those directly impacted by them, but to the future generations as well, which could face new outbreaks, battling epidemics of diseases thought conquered decades ago.  

