
***text 1 Brexit happened, what is lobbying, has it gone up? 

heading - When it comes to influencing European decision makers, London seeks policy advice while the Continentals eye up post-Brexit City. 


Sub Brexit means more lobbying than ever in Brussels.
...and City vultures gear up.


As the key players of the Brexit talks prepare for a very eventful September, interest for access to the EU Institutions has never been higher, with more lobbyists, NGOs, think tanks, and professionals vying to influence decision making than ever.

Lobbying and the influencing of policy making is not news in Brussels. The European Union's transparency register includes all organizations which have been granted permission to enter the European Institutions and interact with stakeholders on a daily basis. 

The register of course is not comprehensive enough to list every meal, coffee, or drink European officials have had with professionals outside the Berlaymont, but it does identify all entities which have been granted clearance to enter the Institutions, along with information such as where their head office is situated, their size, type, and interest field.

Subhead - What changed after the Brexit referendum? 

We examined the transparency register, from June 2014 until present, in order to identify how has the rate of new additions to the register changed pre and post Brexit, which sector they operate in, and if they have an interest in finance.

We also made separate analysis between new additions from the UK, and from Member States which are interested in absorbing as many finance related companies or jobs which flee post-Brexit City for Continental Europe (Germany, France, Ireland, Netherlands), and of course Belgium, in order to account for Brussels based entities. 

We looked at the the location of the head office of each registered entity to determine its base, the format of said organization (whether it is an NGO or a lobby), its size based on the sum of persons involved, and whether it has finance related interests. 

***Chart bar showing Brexit up 

Clearly the events of 2016 and 2017 have led to a considerably increased rate of additions to the  register, especially when we look at the size of the new organizations which seek to access the EU's decision making bodies. 


*** chart line countries

When we break down this increase per Member State, we can see that in the UK there was an initial drop in the rate of new additions between the announcement and the actual referendum. However this was completely reversed and turned into a huge increase in the aftermath of the referendum, showing the ever growing need for policy representation in the European Institutions. 

On the other side of the channel, additions for all other states have increased since 2014, with Germany being the largest force behind influencing the EU, and then Belgium, the Netherlands, France, and Ireland, considerably increase in their efforts.  


Policy matters for the UK


*** Chart line UK section

Far more think tanks are registering from the UK, along with a significant increase in consultancies. Showing the ever growing demand for policy experts assisting with navigating an unprecedented policy process that are Brexit talks. 

In Brussels, think tanks do more than presenting new papers and policy analysis, conferences and soirees present excellent opportunity for high level networking between a number of interests and top EU officials. 

Subhead - NGOs and lobbyists most prevalent, on the other side of the Channel

On the other side though, NGOs and lobbyists are more popular than the other sections, indicating a growing demand for more aggressive influencing of the European Institutions. 

Subhead - City competitors are clear, finance is what matters to them.

To obtain a more thorough idea of how exactly all those entities wish to influence the EU, we isolated all new additions which state that they are interested in finance matters in the transparency register.

***Chart line finance UK 

In line with our previous chart, indicating that UK additions are more focused in policy dissemination and consulting, new additions from Britain are increasingly less interested in lobbying the EU for finance related matters, perhaps shifting their attention to the UK internal finance industry which seems to be getting progressively more worried about a potential hard Brexit. 


Subhead - City competitors are clear, finance is what matters to them.


***Chart line rest of countries

More interestingly though, Frankfurt, Paris, Amsterdam, and Dublin are gearing up for the post-Brexit fallout, by focusing their attention on finance related matters. Although the rate of additions pre Brexit was already high, and experienced a relative dip between the announcement and the referendum day, entities stating that they are interested in "Economic and financial affairs" have clearly increased, along with those interested in "Financial Services and Capital Markets Union". 

Seismic events such as Brexit and the long and arduous talks which are about to resume in September, shake up the status quo, and present many with opportunities to profit out such uncertain times. It is clear that many British banks or financial institutions are preparing contingency plans to move some operations out of London to cities like Dublin, Frankfurt or Paris for a hard Brexit, and the other side of the channel is very well aware of this, and is preparing accordingly.
